[RFC] Wildcard Data Type (#890)
elastic/ecs: rfcs/0000-wildcard-data-type.md

to update their mappings to support wildcard to remain ECS compliant.

## Fields

<!--
Stage: 1: Describe at a high level how this change affects fields. Which fieldsets will be impacted? How many fields overall? Are we primarily adding fields, removing fields, or changing existing fields? The goal here is to understand the fundamental technical implications and likely extent of these changes. ~2-5 sentences.
-->

Adopting wildcard in a field will require changing the defined `type` in the schema from `keyword` to `wildcard`. One example is provided for this initial proposal as an example; a later stage proposal will include the entire list of proposed fields.

Current definition as of ECS 1.5.0:

```yaml
    - name: command_line
      level: extended
      type: keyword
      short: Full command line that started the process.
...
      multi_fields:
      - type: text
        name: text
```

Proposed type change:

```yaml
    - name: command_line
      level: extended
      type: wildcard
      short: Full command line that started the process.
...
      multi_fields:
      - type: text
        name: text
```

> Note the existing `text` data type multi-field will remain to support tokenized searches.

Reviewer: I would amend this to say the following

```suggestion
Note the existing `text` data type multi-field will remain only if there is a need to support tokenized searches.
```

sections list common use cases which would benefit from improved wildcard searching.

#### Paths and names

Searching across various permutations of various file system and URL structures to find a particular file, path, or other resource. Leading wildcard searches on these fields may be necessary to users, but (as keywords) are known to produce very poor search performance
(e.g. let's search for all instances of a known file without an unknown path: `file.path:*syslog.log`).

Example data categories:

* File paths
* URLs
* Usernames
* User agent
* Process names
* Email addresses
* OS names
* Domain names
* Host names
* Registry data

#### Stack traces

Program stack traces tend to be well-structured but with long text and varied contents. There are too many subtleties and application-specific patterns to map all of them accurately with ECS' field definitions. Better performing wildcard searches can help the user formulate their own queries easier and with a smaller performance hit.

### Command-line execution

> Full command-line events often have a series of options or flags which may appear in any arbitrary order. Wildcard searches are often required to successfully identify events regardless of the ordering.

Reviewer: Actually to work around the ordering of the flags, using the array of keywords `process.args` is much better.

The power of having `wildcard` on `process.command_line` is instead to detect subtle patterns like multiple spaces, detect specific substrings, or specifically to take advantage of wildcard's respect of the order to filter for a flag and a specific argument passed to that flag.

Author: Thanks this is good context. I've updated my wording to better capture this detail.

with `wildcard`). The `wildcard` data type will return `keyword` in the output of the field capabilities API call, and this change will enable both types to behave identically at query time. This feature eliminates concerns arising from Kibana's field compatibility checks
in index patterns.

### ECS project

ECS is and will remain an open source licensed project. However, there will be features available under the Elastic license that will benefit the user experience with the Elastic stack and solutions that have a place in the ECS specification. The ECS project's tooling will
create an option in the tooling to generate OSS compatible mappings that continue supporting the OSS licensed features of Elastic.

## Concerns

<!--
Stage 1: Identify potential concerns, implementation challenges, or complexity. Spend some time on this. Play devil's advocate. Try to identify the sort of non-obvious challenges that tend to surface later. The goal here is to surface risks early, allow everyone the time to work through them, and ultimately document resolution for posterity's sake.
-->

> As mentioned previously in the proposal, integrating the wildcard data type into ECS will be the first instance of a Elastic licensed feature being adopted by the schema. Until now ECS has relied only on OSS license features, but we do not want to limit ECS from support Elastic licensed features moving forward. ECS will remained OSS license even if the schema implements certain Elastic licensed features. When ECS adopts a feature available only under a license, it will be noted in the documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned previously in the proposal, integrating the wildcard data type into ECS will be the first instance of an Elastic licensed feature being adopted by the schema. Until now ECS has relied only on OSS licensed features, but we do not want to limit ECS from supporting Elastic licensed features moving forward. ECS will remain OSS licensed even if the schema implements certain Elastic licensed features. When ECS adopts a feature available only under a license, it will be noted in the documentation.
```

## People

The following are the people that consulted on the contents of this RFC.

* @ebeahan | author

## Footnotes

* [0] Wildcard queries on `text` fields are limited to matching individual tokens rather than the original value of the field.

> * [1] Keyword fields do not suffer from the tokening problems of `text` fields, but can suffer from slow performance with wildcard searching (especially with leading wildcards).

Reviewer: The tokenizing of `text` fields is not a bug, it's a feature ;-)

```suggestion
* [1] Keyword fields are not tokenized like `text` fields, so patterns can match multiple words. However they suffer from slow performance with wildcard searching (especially with leading wildcards).
```
